---

I don't think that Roger Ebert was right to say that [video games can never be art](https://www.rogerebert.com/roger-ebert/video-games-can-never-be-art). But my correction is only slight: He ought to have said that video games *likely will* never be art.

There is no doubt that many games contain a great deal of artistry. Some have music, exhibit evocative visual beauty, or include a story, and these are elements one may hire an artist to create. The question is, what does the game have to do with any of these elements? Classical music playing over the bathroom speakers does not turn a bowel movement into artwork; does a great background score do any more for a game? What does the game contribute to its accompanying music?

The reason games won't ever be art is that there's simply no reason to do so, because the game aspect has nothing to add. There is nothing about the artistic expression that can be found in a game's elements that is enhanced by incorporating game into it, and therefore nobody ever chooses to do so. What we see instead is only juxtaposition of games with art to make a product that is commercially viable by giving consumers something easy to engage with, or embedding artwork into a medium that can stretch it out over many hours to make buyers feel that they have gotten their money's worth, which is not the same thing. Including art into a larger product does not make the product itself art any more than bundling AAA-rated mortgages into a larger security makes for a sound investment product.

What a non-gamer critic like Roger Ebert misses is what we can only see through playing enough games, which is that the game part is always fundamentally the same. I remember being young and enraptured by the fundamentally new experience of being differently embodied on screen. Even Julie, who almost certainly will never play a videogame again, reluctantly admits "yeah... it was exciting." But it doesn't take very many before we see them all boil down to skins over a handful of common elements.

The disappointment matches that of my disappointment with computer programming as a whole. In my teenage years, the computer's speed, year-over-year performance advances, and vast reach of the internet seemed a truly unlimited realm of possibility. I am forced to look back over the subsequent few decades and see mostly a series of reinventions as we discover over and over the constraints of the medium, both in what processors can compute in realtime and in the physicality of human-computer interaction. There is only one computer program, and it is *PostgreSQL*. Everything else is dressing and user stories. The games are the same handful of mechanics skinned with different aesthetics and stories. Though usually the same story. You're the chosen one and it's your turn to save the world.

If something is a game, the game is always separable its artistic accoutrements. If you take the random battles out of *Chrono Trigger*, make *Firewatch* play itself out automatically, remove the redundant dungeons from *Skyrim*, what's left is the art, undiminished but unsellable.

The fact is that nobody wants art, they want something to do. Or they want portraits of themselves, which is why the great painters had that as their day jobs. Nobody ever wanted a picture of melting clocks until one day they did. If you're waiting for the next *Fallout* to come out, it's probably not art, since the reason you want it is that you already know what it will be like. The artist brings about something novel that you didn't already want because you didn't already know.

This is why art is generally a terrible way to try to make a living. Are there a lot of potential great artists working on videogames? I imagine so. A lot of their accoutrements are quite nice. Would Dalí have been able to create the distinct and sellable aesthetic of *Borderlands 2*? I bet so. Would he, through this art form, have brought anything so new to the world that he would be remembered for it a century later?

You still probably think about *Barbie* sometimes because it was new and surprising and clearly had opinions. *Oppenheimer* tried harder to be art, but do you even remember it?

*Wolfenstein 3D* was truly novel. But people wanted it. They watched John Carmack's development as it was in progress because they knew they wanted a 3-dimensional shooter. Perhaps the ability to pull it off was surprising, but the desire was not. This is a technical triumph, not an artistic one.

There is perhaps one case in which an author with a worldview to express decided that a game would be the appropriate form of expression. That artist was Elizabeth Magie, the game is *The Landlord's Game*, which was the inspiration for *Monopoly*, which as a game really sucks, which is the whole point of it. If the game part is simply entertaining, then it lacks any substantial connection with its outer sheath. In the vast majority of cases, an artist best achieves whatever it is they're trying to achieve without making you roll dice and push buttons to get to it, and bolting on these tired mechanics would contribute nothing to the vision.
