---
layout: post
title: Kernel, vectors, graphs
date_granularity: day
tags: math
---

It occurred to me that this OS Design course has put me past a certain point of
no return in life. The first assignment was to make a Linux kernel module to
add a simple /proc entry. And the moment I compiled the kernel source... I
became *one of those guys* who has compiled the Linux kernel. This is not the
sort of thing that you can undo.

I think it's awesome.

This is shaping up to be my favorite semester. All good professors, mostly all
good classes. The maths are nice - Since I've been at Tech, I haven't actually
taken very much math. Calc 2, 3, and Combinatorics are the big ones. I'm
currently taking AVS and Graph Theory. None of it is conceptually new to me,
but it's proof-heavy and more in-depth, and stuff is making a lot more sense
the second time around.

I'm convinced that an essential part of learning maths is to be exposed to
higher-level concepts you may not understand yet. Some teachers seem to have
this fear that mentioning a new, unknown word will startle students enough to
send them running away in a terrified confusion. So we hide the majority of
mathematical concepts in the dark as if ashamed of them. Just as my first grade
class denied the existence of numbers less than zero, high school refused to
acknowledge the existence of a vector space of dimension greater than two (or
perhaps three). We did algebra "exercises" in field of real numbers, but never
once heard the word "field". Sometimes an equation's solution is a set, but we
didn't even have a well-defined notion of "set". The mere mention of things you
don't fully understand can be enough to begin to see the bigger picture.
